<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<?xml-model href="../schema-TEI-RADAR/out/TEI_RADAR.rng" type="application/xml"
            schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?>
<?xml-model href="../schema-TEI-RADAR/out/TEI_RADAR.rng" type="application/xml"
            schematypens="http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/schematron"?>
<?xml-stylesheet type="text/xsl" href="../XSLT/RADAR2TEI.xsl"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"
     xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
     xml:lang="en">
   <teiHeader>
      <fileDesc>
         <titleStmt>
            <title>Title</title>
         </titleStmt>
         <publicationStmt>
            <p>Publication Information</p>
         </publicationStmt>
         <sourceDesc>
            <p>Information about the source</p>
         </sourceDesc>
      </fileDesc>
      <profileDesc>
         <textClass>
            <keywords scheme="sdN">
               <term>A2.5. - Software engineering</term>
               <term>A3.3.2. - Data mining</term>
               <term>A3.4.1. - Supervised learning</term>
               <term>A3.4.2. - Unsupervised learning</term>
               <term>A6.1.4. - Multiscale modeling</term>
               <term>A6.2.4. - Statistical methods</term>
               <term>A6.2.8. - Computational geometry and meshes</term>
               <term>A8.1. - Discrete mathematics, combinatorics</term>
               <term>A8.3. - Geometry, Topology</term>
               <term>A8.7. - Graph theory</term>
               <term>A9.2. - Machine learning</term>
            </keywords>
            <keywords scheme="Secteurs">
               <term>B1.1.1. - Structural biology</term>
               <term>B1.1.5. - Immunology</term>
               <term>B1.1.7. - Bioinformatics</term>
            </keywords>
         </textClass>
      </profileDesc>
   </teiHeader>
   <text>
      <front>
         <div type="team" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-cid1">
            <listPerson>
               <person>
                  <persName>
                     <forename>Frédéric</forename>
                     <surname>Cazals</surname>
                  </persName>
                  <occupation>Chercheur</occupation>
                  <affiliation>
                     <orgName type="research-center">Sophia</orgName>
                  </affiliation>
                  <note type="moreinfo">Team leader, Inria, Senior Researcher</note>
                  <education>hdr</education>
               </person>
               <person>
                  <persName>
                     <forename>Dorian</forename>
                     <surname>Mazauric</surname>
                  </persName>
                  <occupation>Chercheur</occupation>
                  <affiliation>
                     <orgName type="research-center">Sophia</orgName>
                  </affiliation>
                  <note type="moreinfo">Inria, Researcher</note>
                  <education>hdr</education>
               </person>
               <person>
                  <persName>
                     <forename>Edoardo</forename>
                     <surname>Sarti</surname>
                  </persName>
                  <occupation>Chercheur</occupation>
                  <affiliation>
                     <orgName type="research-center">Sophia</orgName>
                  </affiliation>
                  <note type="moreinfo">Inria, Researcher, from Oct 2021</note>
               </person>
               <person>
                  <persName>
                     <forename>Vladimir</forename>
                     <surname>Krajnak</surname>
                  </persName>
                  <occupation>PostDoc</occupation>
                  <affiliation>
                     <orgName type="research-center">Sophia</orgName>
                  </affiliation>
                  <note type="moreinfo">Inria, from Oct 2021</note>
               </person>
               <person>
                  <persName>
                     <forename>Timothee</forename>
                     <surname>O Donnell</surname>
                  </persName>
                  <occupation>PhD</occupation>
                  <affiliation>
                     <orgName type="research-center">Sophia</orgName>
                  </affiliation>
                  <note type="moreinfo">Inria</note>
               </person>
               <person>
                  <persName>
                     <forename>Louis</forename>
                     <surname>Goldenberg</surname>
                  </persName>
                  <occupation>Stagiaire</occupation>
                  <affiliation>
                     <orgName type="research-center">Sophia</orgName>
                  </affiliation>
                  <note type="moreinfo">Inria, from Mar 2021 until Aug 2021</note>
               </person>
               <person>
                  <persName>
                     <forename>Aarushi</forename>
                     <surname>Gupta</surname>
                  </persName>
                  <occupation>Stagiaire</occupation>
                  <affiliation>
                     <orgName type="research-center">Sophia</orgName>
                  </affiliation>
                  <note type="moreinfo">Inria, from May 2021 until Aug 2021</note>
               </person>
               <person>
                  <persName>
                     <forename>Valentin</forename>
                     <surname>Madelaine</surname>
                  </persName>
                  <occupation>Stagiaire</occupation>
                  <affiliation>
                     <orgName type="research-center">Sophia</orgName>
                  </affiliation>
                  <note type="moreinfo">Inria, until Mar 2021</note>
               </person>
               <person>
                  <persName>
                     <forename>Maximilien</forename>
                     <surname>Martin</surname>
                  </persName>
                  <occupation>Stagiaire</occupation>
                  <affiliation>
                     <orgName type="research-center">Sophia</orgName>
                  </affiliation>
                  <note type="moreinfo">École Normale Supérieure de Lyon, from Oct 2021</note>
               </person>
               <person>
                  <persName>
                     <forename>Florence</forename>
                     <surname>Barbara</surname>
                  </persName>
                  <occupation>Assistant</occupation>
                  <affiliation>
                     <orgName type="research-center">Sophia</orgName>
                  </affiliation>
                  <note type="moreinfo">Inria</note>
               </person>
               <person>
                  <persName>
                     <forename>Charles</forename>
                     <surname>Robert</surname>
                  </persName>
                  <occupation>CollaborateurExterieur</occupation>
                  <affiliation>
                     <orgName type="research-center">Sophia</orgName>
                  </affiliation>
                  <note type="moreinfo">CNRS</note>
                  <education>hdr</education>
               </person>
               <person>
                  <persName>
                     <forename>Konstantin</forename>
                     <surname>Roeder</surname>
                  </persName>
                  <occupation>CollaborateurExterieur</occupation>
                  <affiliation>
                     <orgName type="research-center">Sophia</orgName>
                  </affiliation>
                  <note type="moreinfo">Robinson College - Cambridge</note>
               </person>
            </listPerson>
         </div>
         <div type="identification" xml:id="abs">
            <listOrg>
               <org type="Project-Team">
                  <orgName type="short">ABS</orgName>
                  <orgName type="full">Algorithms - Biology - Structure</orgName>
                  <desc>
                     <term type="theme-de-recherche">Computational Biology</term>
                     <term type="domaine-de-recherche">Digital Health, Biology and Earth</term>
                     <ref type="urlTeam">http://team.inria.fr/abs</ref>
                     <date type="header_dates_team">Creation of the Project-Team: 2008 July 01</date>
                     <keywords scheme="sdN">
                        <term>A2.5. - Software engineering</term>
                        <term>A3.3.2. - Data mining</term>
                        <term>A3.4.1. - Supervised learning</term>
                        <term>A3.4.2. - Unsupervised learning</term>
                        <term>A6.1.4. - Multiscale modeling</term>
                        <term>A6.2.4. - Statistical methods</term>
                        <term>A6.2.8. - Computational geometry and meshes</term>
                        <term>A8.1. - Discrete mathematics, combinatorics</term>
                        <term>A8.3. - Geometry, Topology</term>
                        <term>A8.7. - Graph theory</term>
                        <term>A9.2. - Machine learning</term>
                     </keywords>
                     <keywords scheme="Secteurs">
                        <term>B1.1.1. - Structural biology</term>
                        <term>B1.1.5. - Immunology</term>
                        <term>B1.1.7. - Bioinformatics</term>
                     </keywords>
                  </desc>
                  <org type="UR">
                     <orgName/>
                  </org>
               </org>
            </listOrg>
         </div>
      </front>
      <body>
         <div type="presentation" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-cid2">
            <head>Overall objectives</head>
            <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid1">
               <head>Biomolecules and their function(s).</head>
               <p> Computational Structural Biology (CSB) is the scientific domain concerned with the development of algorithms
        and software to understand and predict the structure and function of biological macromolecules. This research
        field is inherently multi-disciplinary. On the experimental side, biology and medicine provide the objects
        studied, while biophysics and bioinformatics supply experimental data, which are of two main kinds. On the one
        hand, genome sequencing projects give supply protein sequences, and ~200 millions of sequences have been
        archived in <hi rend="tt">UniProtKB</hi>/<hi rend="tt">TrEMBL</hi> – which collects the protein sequences
        yielded by genome sequencing projects. On the other hand, structure determination experiments (notably X-ray
        crystallography, nuclear magnetic resonance, and cryo-electron microscopy) give access to geometric models of
        molecules – atomic coordinates. Alas, only ~150,000 structures have been solved and deposited in the Protein
        Data Bank (PDB), a number to be compared against the <formula rend="inline">
                     <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                        <mrow>
                           <mo>∼</mo>
                           <msup>
                              <mn>10</mn>
                              <mn>8</mn>
                           </msup>
                        </mrow>
                     </math>
                  </formula> sequences found in <hi rend="tt">UniProtKB</hi>/<hi rend="tt">TrEMBL</hi>. With one structure for ~1000 sequences, we hardly know anything
        about biological functions at the atomic/structural level. Complementing experiments, physical
        chemistry/chemical physics supply the required models (energies, thermodynamics, etc). More specifically, let us
        recall that proteins with <formula rend="inline">
                     <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                        <mi>n</mi>
                     </math>
                  </formula> atoms has <formula rend="inline">
                     <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                        <mrow>
                           <mi>d</mi>
                           <mo>=</mo>
                           <mn>3</mn>
                           <mi>n</mi>
                        </mrow>
                     </math>
                  </formula> Cartesian coordinates, and fixing
        these (up to rigid motions) defines a conformation. As conveyed by the iconic <hi rend="it">lock-and-key</hi>
        metaphor for interacting molecules, Biology is based on the interactions stable conformations make with each
        other. Turning these intuitive notions into quantitative ones requires delving into statistical physics, as
        macroscopic properties are average properties computed over ensembles of conformations. Developing effective
        algorithms to perform accurate simulations is especially challenging for two main reasons. The first one is the
        high dimension of conformational spaces – see <formula rend="inline">
                     <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                        <mrow>
                           <mi>d</mi>
                           <mo>=</mo>
                           <mn>3</mn>
                           <mi>n</mi>
                        </mrow>
                     </math>
                  </formula> above, typically several tens of
        thousands, and the non linearity of the energy functionals used. The second one is the multiscale nature of the
        phenomena studied: with biologically relevant time scales beyond the millisecond, and atomic vibrations periods
        of the order of femto-seconds, simulating such phenomena typically requires <formula rend="inline">
                     <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                        <mrow>
                           <mo>≫</mo>
                           <msup>
                              <mn>10</mn>
                              <mn>12</mn>
                           </msup>
                        </mrow>
                     </math>
                  </formula> conformations/frames, a (brute)
          <hi rend="it">tour de force</hi> rarely achieved  <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_shaw2010atomic"/>.</p>
               <p/>
            </div>
            <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid2">
               <head>Computational Structural Biology: three main challenges.</head>
               <p> The first challenge, <hi rend="it">sequence-to-structure prediction</hi>, aims to infer the possible
        structure(s) of a protein from its amino acid sequence. While recent progress has been made recently using in
        particular deep learning techniques <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_senior2020improved"/>, the models obtained so far
        are static and coarse-grained.</p>
               <p>The second one is <hi rend="it">protein function prediction</hi>. Given a protein with known structure <hi rend="it">i.e.</hi> 3D coordinates, the goal is to predict the partners of this protein, in terms of stability
        and specificity. This understanding is fundamental to biology and medicine, as illustrated by the example of the
        SARS-CoV-2 virus responsible of the Covid19 pandemic. To infect a host, the virus first fuses its envelope with
        the membrane of a target cell, and then injects its genetic material into that cell. Fusion is achieved by a
        so-called class I fusion protein, also found in other viruses (influenza, SARS-CoV-1, HIV, etc). The fusion
        process is a highly dynamic process involving large amplitude conformational changes of the molecules. It is
        poorly understood, which hinders our ability to design therapeutics to block it.</p>
               <figure xml:id="fig-1">
                  <head>Figure 1: <hi rend="bold">The synergy modeling - experiments, and challenges faced in CSB: illustration
            on the problem of designing miniproteins blocking the entry of SARS-CoV-2 into cells. From <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_cao2020novo"/>.</hi> Of note: the first step of the infection by
          SARS-CoV-2 is the attachment of its receptor binding domain of its spike (RBD, blue molecule), to a target
          protein found on the membrane of our cells, ACE2 (orange molecule). A strategy to block infection is therefore
          to engineer a molecule binding the RBD, preventing its attachment to ACE2. <hi rend="bold">(A)</hi> Design of
          a helical protein (orange) mimicking a region of the ACE2 protein. <hi rend="bold">(B)</hi> Assessment of
          binding modes (conformation, binding energies) of candidate miniproteins neutralizing the RBD.</head>
               </figure>
               <p>Finally, the third one, <hi rend="it">large assembly reconstruction</hi>, aims at solving (coarse-grain)
        structures of molecular machines involving tens or even hundreds of subunits. This research vein was promoted
        about 15 years back by the work on the nuclear pore complex <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_aal-manpc-07"/>. It is often
        referred to as <hi rend="it">reconstruction by data integration</hi>, as it necessitates to combine coarse-grain
        models (notably from cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) and native mass spectrometry) with atomic models of
        subunits obtained from X ray crystallography. Fitting the latter into the former requires exploring the
        conformation space of subunits, whence the importance of protein dynamics.</p>
               <p>As an illustration of these three challenges, consider the problem of designing proteins blocking the entry of
        SARS-CoV-2 into our cells (Fig. <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_label_fig-fig-baker"/>). The first challenge is illustrated
        by the problem of predicting the structure of a blocker protein from its sequence of amino-acids – a tractable
        problem here since the mini proteins used only comprise of the order of 50 amino-acids (Fig. <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_label_fig-fig-baker"/>(A), <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_cao2020novo"/>). The second
        challenge is illustrated by the calculation of the binding modes and the binding affinity of the designed
        proteins for the RBD of SARS-CoV-2 (Fig. <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_label_fig-fig-baker"/>(B)). Finally, the last challenge is
        illustrated by the problem of solving structures of the virus with a cell, to understand how many spikes are
        involved in the fusion mechanism leading to infection. In <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_cao2020novo"/>, the promising
        designs suggested by modeling have been assessed by an array of wet lab experiments (affinity measurements,
        circular dichroism for thermal stability assessment, structure resolution by cryo-EM). The <hi rend="it">hyperstable</hi> minibinders identified provide starting points for SARS-CoV-2 therapeutics  <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_cao2020novo"/>. We note in passing that this is truly remarkable work, yet,
        the designed proteins stem from a template (the <hi rend="it">bottom</hi> helix from ACE2), and are rather
        small.</p>
               <figure xml:id="fig-2">
                  <head>Figure 2: The main challenges of molecular simulation: Finding significant local minima of the energy
          landscape, computing statistical weights of catchment basins by integrating Boltzmann's factor, and
          identifying transitions. Practically, <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mrow>
                              <mi>d</mi>
                              <mo>&gt;</mo>
                              <mn>100</mn>
                           </mrow>
                        </math>
                     </formula>.</head>
               </figure>
            </div>
            <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid5">
               <head>Protein dynamics: core CS - maths challenges.</head>
               <p>To present challenges in structural modeling, let us recall the following ingredients. First, a molecular model
        with <formula rend="inline">
                     <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                        <mi>n</mi>
                     </math>
                  </formula> atoms
        is parameterized over a conformational space <formula rend="inline">
                     <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                        <mi>𝒳</mi>
                     </math>
                  </formula> of dimension <formula rend="inline">
                     <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                        <mrow>
                           <mi>d</mi>
                           <mo>=</mo>
                           <mn>3</mn>
                           <mi>n</mi>
                        </mrow>
                     </math>
                  </formula> in Cartesian coordinates, or
          <formula rend="inline">
                     <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                        <mrow>
                           <mi>d</mi>
                           <mo>=</mo>
                           <mn>3</mn>
                           <mi>n</mi>
                           <mo>-</mo>
                           <mn>6</mn>
                        </mrow>
                     </math>
                  </formula> in internal
        coordinate–upon removing rigid motions, also called degree of freedom (<hi rend="it">d.o.f.</hi>). Second,
        recall that the <hi rend="it">potential energy landscape</hi> (PEL) is the mapping <formula rend="inline">
                     <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                        <mrow>
                           <mi>V</mi>
                           <mo>(</mo>
                           <mo>·</mo>
                           <mo>)</mo>
                        </mrow>
                     </math>
                  </formula> from <formula rend="inline">
                     <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                        <msup>
                           <mi>ℝ</mi>
                           <mi>d</mi>
                        </msup>
                     </math>
                  </formula> to <formula rend="inline">
                     <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                        <mi>ℝ</mi>
                     </math>
                  </formula> providing a
        potential energy for each conformation  <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_wales2003energy"/>, <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_schon2009prediction"/>. Example potential energies (PE) are <hi rend="tt">CHARMM</hi>, <hi rend="tt">AMBER</hi>, <hi rend="tt">MARTINI</hi>, etc. Such PE belong to the realm of
        molecular mechanics, and implement atomic or coarse-grain models. They may embark a solvent model, either
        explicit or implicit. Their definition requires a significant number of parameters (up to <formula rend="inline">
                     <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                        <mrow>
                           <mo>∼</mo>
                           <mn>1</mn>
                           <mo>,</mo>
                           <mn>000</mn>
                        </mrow>
                     </math>
                  </formula>), fitted to reproduce
        physico-chemical properties of (bio-)molecules  <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_wang2014building"/>.</p>
               <p>These PE are usually considered good enough to study non covalent interactions – our focus, even tough they do
        not cover the modification of chemical bonds. In any case, we take such a function for granted <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021-note-uid6"/>.</p>
               <p>The PEL codes all <hi rend="bold">structural, thermodynamic</hi>, and <hi rend="bold">kinetic</hi> properties,
        which can be obtained by averaging properties of conformations over so-called <hi rend="it">thermodynamic
          ensembles</hi>. The <hi rend="bold">structure</hi> of a macromolecular system requires the characterization of
        active conformations and important intermediates in functional pathways involving significant basins. In
        assigning occupation probabilities to these conformations by integrating Boltzmann's distribution, one treats
          <hi rend="bold">thermodynamics</hi>. Finally, transitions between the states, modeled, say, by a master
        equation (a continuous-time Markov process), correspond to <hi rend="bold">kinetics</hi>. Classical simulation
        methods based on molecular dynamics (MD) and Monte Carlo sampling (MC) are developed in the lineage of the
        seminal work by the 2013 recipients of the Nobel prize in chemistry (Karplus, Levitt, Warshel), which was
        awarded “<hi rend="it">for the development of multiscale models for complex chemical systems</hi>”. However,
        except for highly specialized cases where massive calculations have been used <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_shaw2010atomic"/>, neither MD nor MC give access to the aforementioned time
        scales. In fact, the main limitation of such methods is that they treat structural, thermodynamic and kinetic
        aspects at once <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_frenkel2002understanding"/>. The absence of specific insights on these three
        complementary pieces of the puzzle makes it impossible to optimize simulation methods, and results in general in
        the inability to obtain converged simulations on biologically relevant time-scales.</p>
               <p>The hardness of structural modeling owes to three intertwined reasons.</p>
               <p>First, PELs of biomolecules usually exhibit a number of critical points exponential in the dimension  <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_ball1999dynamics"/>; fortunately, they enjoy a multi-scale structure  <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_energy2016carr"/>. Intuitively, the significant local minima/basins are those
        which are <hi rend="it">deep</hi> or <hi rend="it">isolated/wide</hi>, two notions which are mathematically
        qualified by the concepts of persistence and prominence. Mathematically, problems are plagued with the curse of
        dimensionality and measure concentration phenomena. Second, biomolecular processes are inherently multi-scale,
        with motions spanning <formula rend="inline">
                     <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                        <mo>∼</mo>
                     </math>
                  </formula> 15 and <formula rend="inline">
                     <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                        <mo>∼</mo>
                     </math>
                  </formula> 4 orders of magnitude in time and amplitude respectively <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_adcock2006molecular"/>. Developing methods able to exploit this multi-scale
        structure has remained elusive. Third, macroscopic properties of biomolecules <hi rend="it">i.e.</hi>
        observables, are average properties computed over ensembles of conformations, which calls for a multi-scale
        statistical treatment both of thermodynamics and kinetics.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid7">
               <head>Validating models.</head>
               <p>A natural and critical question naturally concerns the validation of models proposed in structural
        bioinformatics. For all three types of questions of interest (structures, thermodynamics, kinetics), there exist
        experiments to which the models must be confronted – when the experiments can be conducted.</p>
               <p>For structures, the models proposed can readily be compared against experimental results stemming from X ray
        crystallography, NMR, or cryo electron microscopy. For thermodynamics, which we illustrate here with binding
        affinities, predictions can be compared against measurements provided by calorimetry or surface plasmon
        resonance. Lastly, kinetic predictions can also be assessed by various experiments such as binding affinity
        measurements (for the prediction of <formula rend="inline">
                     <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                        <msub>
                           <mi>K</mi>
                           <mrow>
                              <mi>o</mi>
                              <mi>n</mi>
                           </mrow>
                        </msub>
                     </math>
                  </formula> and <formula rend="inline">
                     <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                        <msub>
                           <mi>K</mi>
                           <mrow>
                              <mi>o</mi>
                              <mi>f</mi>
                              <mi>f</mi>
                           </mrow>
                        </msub>
                     </math>
                  </formula>), or fluorescence
        based methods (for kinetics of folding).</p>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div type="fondements" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-cid3">
            <head>Research program</head>
            <p>Our research program ambition to develop a comprehensive set of novel concepts and algorithms to study protein
      dynamics, based on the modular framework of PEL.</p>
            <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid8">
               <head>Modeling the dynamics of proteins</head>
               <list type="Keywords">
                  <item>
                     <term>Molecular conformations</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>conformational exploration</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>energy landscapes</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>thermodynamics</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>kinetics.</term>
                  </item>
               </list>
               <p>As noticed while discussing <hi rend="it">Protein dynamics: core CS - maths challenges</hi>, the integrated
        nature of simulation methods such as MD or MC is such that these methods do not in general give access to
        biologically relevant time scales. The framework of energy landscapes <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_wales2003energy"/>, <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_schon2009prediction"/> (Fig. <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_label_fig-fig"/>) is much more
        modular, yet, large biomolecular systems remain out of reach.</p>
               <p>To make a definitive step towards solving the prediction of protein dynamics, we will serialize the discovery
        and the exploitation of a PEL <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-cazals2015conformational"/>, <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-roth2016hybridizing"/>, <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-energy2016carr"/>. Ideas and
        concepts from computational geometry/geometric motion planning, machine learning, probabilistic algorithms, and
        numerical probability will be used to develop two classes of probabilistic algorithms. The first deals with
        algorithms to discover/sketch PELs <hi rend="it">i.e.</hi> enumerate all significant (persistent or prominent)
        local minima and their connections across saddles, a difficult task since the number of all local
        minima/critical points is generally exponential in the dimension. To this end, we will develop a hierarchical
        data structure coding PELs as well as multi-scale proposals to explore molecular conformations. (Nb: in Monte
        Carlo methods, a proposal generates a new conformation from an existing one.) The second focuses on methods to
        exploit/sample PELs <hi rend="it">i.e.</hi> compute so-called densities of states, from which all thermodynamic
        quantities are given by standard relations  <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_callen1985thermodynamics"/>
                  <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_lelievre2010free"/>. This is a hard problem akin to high-dimensional
        numerical integration. To solve this problem, we will develop a learning based strategy for the Wang-Landau
        algorithm  <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_landau2014guide"/>–an adaptive Monte Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC) algorithm, as
        well as a generalization of multi-phase Monte Carlo methods for convex/polytope volume calculations  <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_kannan1997random"/>, <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_cousins2016practical"/>, for
        non convex strata of PELs.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid9">
               <head>Algorithmic foundations: geometry, optimization, machine learning</head>
               <list type="Keywords">
                  <item>
                     <term>Geometry</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>optimization</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>machine learning</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>randomized algorithms</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>sampling</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>optimization..</term>
                  </item>
               </list>
               <p>As discussed in the previous Section, the study of PEL and protein dynamics raises difficult algorithmic /
        mathematical questions. As an illustration, one may consider our recent work on the comparison of high
        dimensional distribution <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-cazals-hal-01245408"/>, statistical tests /
        two-sample tests <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-cazals-hal-02425602"/>, <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-lheritier-hal-01968190"/>,
        the comparison of clustering <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-cazals-hal-02425599"/>, the complexity study of
        graph inference problems for low-resolution reconstruction of assemblies <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-cohen-hal-01947563"/>, the analysis of partition (or clustering) stability
        in large networks, the complexity of the representation of simplicial complexes <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-boissonnat-hal-01259806"/>. Making progress on such questions is
        fundamental to advance the state-of-the art on protein dynamics.</p>
               <p>We will continue to work on such questions, motivated by CSB / theoretical biophysics, both in the continuous
        (geometric) and discrete settings. The developments will be based on a combination of ideas and concepts from
        computational geometry, machine learning (notably on non linear dimensionality reduction, the reconstruction of
        cell complexes, and sampling methods), graph algorithms, probabilistic algorithms, optimization, numerical
        probability, and also biophysics.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid10">
               <head>Software: the Structural Bioinformatics Library</head>
               <list type="Keywords">
                  <item>
                     <term>Scientific software</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>generic programming</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>molecular modeling..</term>
                  </item>
               </list>
               <p>While our main ambition is to advance the algorithmic foundations of molecular simulation, a major challenge
        will be to ensure that the theoretical and algorithmic developments will change the fate of applications, as
        illustrated by our case studies. To foster such a symbiotic relationship between theory, algorithms and
        simulation, we will pursue high quality software development and integration within the <hi rend="tt">SBL</hi>,
        and will also take the appropriate measures for the software to be widely adopted.</p>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid11">
                  <head>Software in structural bioinformatics.</head>
                  <p>Software development for structural bioinformatics is especially challenging, combining advanced geometric,
          numerical and combinatorial algorithms, with complex biophysical models for PEL and related
          thermodynamic/kinetic properties. Specific features of the proteins studied must also be accommodated. About
          50 years after the development of force fields and simulation methods (see the 2013 Nobel prize in chemistry),
          the software implementing such methods has a profound impact on molecular science at large. One can indeed
          cite packages such as <hi rend="tt">CHARMM</hi>, <hi rend="tt">AMBER</hi>, <hi rend="tt">gromacs</hi>, <hi rend="tt">gmin</hi>, <hi rend="tt">MODELLER</hi>, <hi rend="tt">Rosetta</hi>, <hi rend="tt">VMD</hi>, <hi rend="tt">PyMol</hi>, .... On the other hand, these packages are goal oriented, each tackling a (small set
          of) specific goal(s). In fact, no real modular software design and integration has taken place. As a result,
          despite the high quality software packages available, inter-operability between algorithmic building blocks
          has remained very limited.</p>
               </div>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid12">
                  <head>The <hi rend="tt">SBL</hi>.</head>
                  <p>Predicting the dynamics of large molecular systems requires the integration of advanced algorithmic building
          blocks / complex software components. To achieve a sufficient level of integration, we undertook the
          development of the Structural Bioinformatics Library (<hi rend="tt">SBL</hi>, <ref type="simple" target="http://sbl.inria.fr"/>) <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-cazals-hal-01379635"/>, a generic C++/python
          cross-platform library providing software to solve complex problems in structural bioinformatics. For
          end-users, the <hi rend="tt">SBL</hi> provides ready to use, state-of-the-art applications to model
          macro-molecules and their complexes at various resolutions, and also to store results in perennial and easy to
          use data formats (<ref type="simple" target="https://sbl.inria.fr/applications/"/>). For developers, the <hi rend="tt">SBL</hi> provides a
          broad C++/python toolbox with modular design (<ref type="simple" target="https://sbl.inria.fr/doc/"/>). This hybrid status targeting both
          end-users and developers stems from an advanced software design involving four software components, namely
          applications, core algorithms, biophysical models, and modules (<ref type="simple" target="https://sbl.inria.fr/doc/modules.html"/>). This modular design makes it possible to optimize
          robustness and the performance of individual components, which can then be assembled within a goal oriented
          application.</p>
               </div>
            </div>
            <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid13">
               <head>Applications: modeling interfaces, contacts, and interactions</head>
               <list type="Keywords">
                  <item>
                     <term>Protein interactions</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>protein complexes</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>structure/thermodynamics/kinetics prediction.</term>
                  </item>
               </list>
               <p>Our methods will be validated on various systems for which flexibility operates at various scales. Example such
        systems are antibody-antigen complexes, (viral) polymerases, (membrane) transporters.</p>
               <p>Even very complex biomolecular systems are deterministic in prescribed conditions (temperature, pH, etc),
        demonstrating that despite their high dimensionality, all <hi rend="it">d.o.f.</hi> are not at play at the same
        time. This insight suggests three classes of systems of particular interest. The first class consists of systems
        defined from (essentially) rigid blocks whose relative positions change thanks to conformational changes of
        linkers; a Newton cradle provides an interesting way to envision such as system. We have recently worked on one
        such system, a membrane proteins involve in antibiotic resistance (<hi rend="tt">AcrB</hi>, see <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-simsir-hal-03006981"/>. The second class consists of cases where relative
        positions of subdomains do not significantly change, yet, their intrinsic dynamics are significantly altered. A
        classical illustration is provided by antibodies, whose binding affinity owes to dynamics localized in six
        specific loops <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-marillet-hal-01159641"/>, <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-marillet-hal-01675467"/>.
        The third class, consisting of composite cases, will greatly benefit from insights on the first two classes. As
        an example, we may consider the spikes of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, whose function (performing infection) involves
        both large amplitude conformational changes and subtle dynamics of the so-called receptor binding domain. We
        have started to investigate this system, in collaboration with B. Delmas (<hi rend="tt">INRAe</hi>) <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_bereux-hal-03387889"/>.</p>
               <p>In ABS, we will investigate systems in these three tiers, in collaboration with expert collaborators, to
        hopefully open new perspectives in biology and medicine. Along the way, we will also collaborate on selected
        questions at the interface between CSB and systems biology, as it is now clear that the structural level and the
        systems level (pathways of interacting molecules) can benefit from one another.</p>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div type="domaine" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-cid4">
            <head>Application domains</head>
            <p>The main application domain is Computational Structural Biology, as underlined in the <hi rend="it">Research
        Program</hi>.</p>
         </div>
         <div type="highlights" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-cid5">
            <head>Highlights of the year</head>
            <p>In October 2021, Edoardo Sarti has joined ABS as <hi rend="it">Chargé de Recherche de Classe Normale</hi>. His
      expertise comprises a diverse set of interests spanning from algorithmic questions about geometrical, functional
      and evolutionary aspects of biomolecules (latest study: <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_lemoigne-hal-03521911"/>), to
      the collection and analysis of large collections of molecular structural data. From the very start, E. Sarti has
      started taking part in several research and technical projects of ABS.</p>
         </div>
         <div type="logiciels" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-cid6">
            <head>New software and platforms</head>
            <p>See report on the Structural Bioinformatics Library.</p>
            <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid14">
               <head>New software</head>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid15">
                  <head>SBL</head>
                  <list type="descriptionlist">
                     <label>Name:</label>
                     <label>Keywords:</label>
                     <label>Functional Description:</label>
                     <label>Release Contributions:</label>
                     <label>URL:</label>
                     <label>Publication:</label>
                     <label>Contact:</label>
                  </list>
               </div>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div type="resultats" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-cid7">
            <head>New results</head>
            <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid23">
               <head>Modeling interfaces, contacts, and interactions</head>
               <list type="Keywords">
                  <item>
                     <term>docking</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>scoring</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>interfaces</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>protein complexes</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>Voronoi diagrams</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>arrangements of balls.</term>
                  </item>
               </list>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid24">
                  <head>Boosting the analysis of protein interfaces with Multiple Interface String Alignments: illustration
          on the spikes of coronaviruses</head>
                  <desc>
                     <listPerson type="participants">
                        <person>
                           <persName>
                              <forename>F.</forename>
                              <surname>Cazals</surname>
                           </persName>
                        </person>
                     </listPerson>
                  </desc>
                  <note type="moreinfo">In collaboration with S. Bereux and B. Delmas (INRAe, Jouy-en-Josas). </note>
                  <p>In this work <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_bereux-hal-03387889"/>, we introduce <hi rend="it">Multiple Interface
            String Alignment</hi> (MISA), a visualization tool to display coherently various sequence and structure
          based statistics at protein-protein interfaces (SSE elements, buried surface area, <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mrow>
                              <mi>Δ</mi>
                              <mi>A</mi>
                              <mi>S</mi>
                              <mi>A</mi>
                           </mrow>
                        </math>
                     </formula>, B factor values, etc). The
          amino-acids supporting these annotations are obtained from Voronoi interface models. The benefit of MISA is to
          collate annotated sequences of (homologous) chains found in different biological contexts i.e. bound with
          different partners or unbound. The aggregated views MISA/SSE, MISA/BSA, MISA/<formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mrow>
                              <mi>Δ</mi>
                              <mi>A</mi>
                              <mi>S</mi>
                              <mi>A</mi>
                           </mrow>
                        </math>
                     </formula> etc make it trivial to identify
          commonalities and differences between chains, to infer key interface residues, and to understand where
          conformational changes occur upon binding. As such, they should prove of key relevance for knowledge based
          annotations of protein databases such as the Protein Data Bank.</p>
                  <p>Illustrations are provided on the receptor binding domain (RBD) of coronaviruses, in complex with their
          cognate partner or (neutralizing) antibodies. MISA computed with a minimal number of structures complement and
          enrich findings previously reported.</p>
                  <p>The corresponding package is available from the Structural Bioinformatics Library (<ref type="simple" target="http://sbl.inria.fr"/>
                  </p>
                  <p rend="noindent">and <ref type="simple"
                          target="https://sbl.inria.fr/doc/Multiple_interface_string_alignment-user-manual.html"/>).</p>
               </div>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid25">
                  <head>SARS-CoV-2 Through the Lens of Computational Biology: How bioinformatics is playing a key role in the
          study of the virus and its origins</head>
                  <desc>
                     <listPerson type="participants">
                        <person>
                           <persName>
                              <forename>F.</forename>
                              <surname>Cazals</surname>
                           </persName>
                        </person>
                     </listPerson>
                  </desc>
                  <note type="moreinfo">In collaboration with Samuel Alizon (MIVEGEC - Maladies infectieuses et vecteurs : écologie,
          génétique, évolution et contrôle), Stéphane Guindon (MAB - Méthodes et Algorithmes pour la Bioinformatique,
          LIRMM - Laboratoire d'Informatique de Robotique et de Microélectronique de Montpellier), Claire Lemaitre
          (GenScale - Scalable, Optimized and Parallel Algorithms for Genomics, Inria Rennes – Bretagne Atlantique),
          Tristan Mary-Huard (INRAE - Institut National de Recherche pour l’Agriculture, l’Alimentation et
          l’Environnement), Anna Niarakis (Lifeware - Computational systems biology and optimization, Inria Saclay - Ile
          de France; GenHotel - Laboratoire de recherche européen pour la polyarthrite rhumatoïde), Mikaël Salson
          (CRIStAL - Centre de Recherche en Informatique, Signal et Automatique de Lille - UMR 9189), Celine Scornavacca
          (UMR ISEM - Institut des Sciences de l'Evolution de Montpellier), Hélène Touzet (CRIStAL - Centre de Recherche
          en Informatique, Signal et Automatique de Lille - UMR 9189). </note>
                  <p>On December 2019, the Chinese Center for Disease Control reported several cases of severe pneumonia that
          resists usual treatments in the city of Wuhan. This was the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic which caused
          more than 80 millions infection cases and 1.7 millions deaths during the year 2020 alone1 . This major
          outbreak has given rise to global public health responses as well as an international research effort of
          unprecedented scope and speed. This scientific mobilization has led to remarkable results, which have enabled
          a great deal of knowledge to be accumulated in just a few months on this novel pathogen: identification of the
          virus, of its main proteins, analysis of its origin and its functionning. This basic biological knowledge is
          mandatory to medical advances: design tests, find a vaccine or a cure.</p>
                  <p>In this document <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_alizon-hal-03170023"/>, one year after the beginning of the worldwide
          spread of the disease, we wish to shed particular light on the contribution of bioinformatics in all this
          work. Bioinformatics is a discipline at crossroads of computer sciences, mathematics and biology that has
          taken on an inestimable importance in modern biology and medicine. It provides computational models,
          algorithms and software to the scientific community, that are both operational and effective. The discovery
          and study of the SARS-Cov-2 coronavirus is an emblematic example. The utilization of bioinformatics methods
          has been at the heart of essential milestones : from the sequencing of the virus genome and its annotation to
          the history of its origin, the modelisation of interacting biological entities both at the molecular scale and
          at the network scale, and the study of the host genetic susceptibility. All these studies, as a whole, have
          made it possible to elucidate the nature and the functionning of the novel pathogen and have greatly
          contributed to the fight against COVID-19.</p>
               </div>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid26">
                  <head>Gene prioritization based on random walks with restarts and absorbing states, to define gene sets
          regulating drug pharmacodynamics from single-cell analyses</head>
                  <desc>
                     <listPerson type="participants">
                        <person>
                           <persName>
                              <forename>F.</forename>
                              <surname>Cazals</surname>
                           </persName>
                        </person>
                        <person>
                           <persName>
                              <forename>D.</forename>
                              <surname>Mazauric</surname>
                           </persName>
                        </person>
                        <person>
                           <persName>
                              <forename>A.</forename>
                              <surname>Sales de Queiroz</surname>
                           </persName>
                        </person>
                        <person>
                           <persName>
                              <forename>G.</forename>
                              <surname>Sales Santa Cruz</surname>
                           </persName>
                        </person>
                     </listPerson>
                  </desc>
                  <note type="moreinfo">In collaboration with Alain Jean-Marie (Inria Neo) and Jérémie Roux (Inserm and CNRS and UCA). </note>
                  <p>Prioritizing genes for their role in drug sensitivity, is an important step in understanding drugs mechanisms
          of action and discovering new molecular targets for co-treatment. In this work <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_salesdequeiroz-hal-03438430"/>, we formalize this problem by considering
          two sets of genes <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>X</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula> and <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>P</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula> respectively composing the predictive gene signature of sensitivity to a
          drug and the genes involved in its mechanism of action, as well as a protein interaction network (PPIN)
          containing the products of <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>X</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula> and <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>P</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula> as nodes. We introduce <hi rend="tt">Genetrank</hi>, a method to prioritize
          the genes in <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>X</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula> for their likelihood to regulate the genes in <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>P</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula>.</p>
                  <p>
                     <hi rend="tt">Genetrank</hi> uses asymmetric random walks with restarts, absorbing states, and a suitable
          renormalization scheme. Using novel so-called saturation indices, we show that the conjunction of absorbing
          states and renormalization yields an exploration of the PPIN which is much more progressive than that afforded
          by random walks with restarts only. Using MINT as underlying network, we apply <hi rend="tt">Genetrank</hi> to
          a predictive gene signature of cancer cells sensitivity to tumor-necrosis-factor-related apoptosis-inducing
          ligand (TRAIL), performed in single-cells. Our ranking provides biological insights on drug sensitivity and a
          gene set considerably enriched in genes regulating TRAIL pharmacodynamics when compared to the most
          significant differentially expressed genes obtained from a statistical analysis framework alone. We also
          introduce <hi rend="it">gene expression radars</hi>, a visualization tool to assess all pairwise interactions
          at a glance.</p>
                  <p>
                     <hi rend="tt">Genetrank</hi> is made available in the Structural Bioinformatics Library (<ref type="simple"
                          target="https://sbl.inria.fr/doc/Genetrank-user-manual.html"/>). It should prove useful for mining gene sets in
          conjunction with a signaling pathway, whenever other approaches yield relatively large sets of genes.</p>
               </div>
            </div>
            <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid27">
               <head>Modeling the dynamics of proteins</head>
               <list type="Keywords">
                  <item>
                     <term>protein</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>flexibility</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>collective coordinate</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>conformational sampling dimensionality reduction.</term>
                  </item>
               </list>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid28">
                  <head>Tripeptide loop closure: a detailed study of reconstructions based on Ramachandran
          distributions</head>
                  <desc>
                     <listPerson type="participants">
                        <person>
                           <persName>
                              <forename>F.</forename>
                              <surname>Cazals</surname>
                           </persName>
                        </person>
                        <person>
                           <persName>
                              <forename>T.</forename>
                              <surname>O'Donnell</surname>
                           </persName>
                        </person>
                     </listPerson>
                  </desc>
                  <note type="moreinfo">In collaboration with C. Robert (IBPC / CNRS, Paris, France). </note>
                  <p>Tripeptide loop closure (TLC) is a standard procedure to reconstruct protein backbone conformations, by
          solving a polynomial system in a single variable yielding up to 16 real solutions.</p>
                  <p>In this work <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_odonnell-hal-03232851"/>, we first show that multiprecision is required in
          a TLC solver to guarantee the existence and the accuracy of solutions. We then compare solutions yielded by
          the TLC solver against tripeptides from the Protein Data Bank. We show that these solutions are geometrically
          diverse (up to <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mrow>
                              <mn>3</mn>
                              <mi>Å</mi>
                           </mrow>
                        </math>
                     </formula> RMSD with respect to the data), and sound in terms
          of potential energy. Finally, we compare Ramachandran distributions of data and reconstructions for the three
          amino acids. The distribution of reconstructions in the second angular space <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mrow>
                              <mo>(</mo>
                              <msub>
                                 <mi>ϕ</mi>
                                 <mn>2</mn>
                              </msub>
                              <mo>,</mo>
                              <msub>
                                 <mi>ψ</mi>
                                 <mn>2</mn>
                              </msub>
                              <mo>)</mo>
                           </mrow>
                        </math>
                     </formula>
          stands out, with a rather uniform distribution leaving a central void.</p>
                  <p>We anticipate that these insights, coupled to our robust implementation in the Structural Bioinformatics
          Library (<ref type="simple"
                          target="https://sbl.inria.fr/doc/Tripeptide_loop_closure-user-manual.html"/>), will help understanding the
          properties of TLC reconstructions, with potential applications to the generation of conformations of flexible
          loops in particular.</p>
               </div>
            </div>
            <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid29">
               <head>Algorithmic foundations</head>
               <list type="Keywords">
                  <item>
                     <term>Computational geometry</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>computational topology</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>optimization</term>
                  </item>
                  <item>
                     <term>data analysis.</term>
                  </item>
               </list>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid30">
                  <head>Frechet mean and p-mean on the unit circle: characterization, decidability, and algorithm</head>
                  <desc>
                     <listPerson type="participants">
                        <person>
                           <persName>
                              <forename>F.</forename>
                              <surname>Cazals</surname>
                           </persName>
                        </person>
                        <person>
                           <persName>
                              <forename>T.</forename>
                              <surname>O'Donnell</surname>
                           </persName>
                        </person>
                     </listPerson>
                  </desc>
                  <note type="moreinfo">In collaboration with B. Delmas (INRAe, Jouy-en-Josas). </note>
                  <p>The center of mass of a point set lying on a manifold generalizes the celebrated Euclidean centroid, and is
          ubiquitous in statistical analysis in non Euclidean spaces.</p>
                  <p>In this work <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_cazals-hal-03183028"/>, we give a complete characterization of the weighted
            <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>p</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula>-mean of
          a finite set of angular values on <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <msup>
                              <mi>S</mi>
                              <mn>1</mn>
                           </msup>
                        </math>
                     </formula>, based on a decomposition of <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <msup>
                              <mi>S</mi>
                              <mn>1</mn>
                           </msup>
                        </math>
                     </formula> such that the functional of interest has at most one
          local minimum per cell. This characterization is used to show that the problem is decidable for rational
          angular values –a consequence of Lindemann's theorem on the transcendence of <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>π</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula>, and to develop an effective
          algorithm parameterized by exact predicates. A robust implementation of this algorithm based on
          multi-precision interval arithmetic is also presented, and is shown to be effective for large values of
            <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>n</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula> and
            <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>p</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula>. We use
          it as building block to implement the k-means and k-means++ clustering algorithms on the flat torus, with
          applications to clustering protein molecular conformations. These algorithms are available in the Structural
          Bioinformatics Library (<ref type="simple" target="http://sbl.inria.fr"/>).</p>
                  <p>Our derivations are of interest in two respects. First, efficient <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>p</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula>-mean calculations are relevant to
          develop principal components analysis on the flat torus encoding angular spaces–a particularly important case
          to describe molecular conformations. Second, our two-stage strategy stresses the interest of combinatorial
          methods for p-means, also emphasizing the role of numerical issues.</p>
               </div>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid31">
                  <head>Improved polytope volume calculations based on Hamiltonian Monte Carlo with boundary reflections and
          sweet arithmetics</head>
                  <desc>
                     <listPerson type="participants">
                        <person>
                           <persName>
                              <forename>F.</forename>
                              <surname>Cazals</surname>
                           </persName>
                        </person>
                        <person>
                           <persName>
                              <forename>A.</forename>
                              <surname>Chevallier</surname>
                           </persName>
                        </person>
                     </listPerson>
                  </desc>
                  <note type="moreinfo">In collaboration with S. Pion IMS (Univ. Bordeaux / Bordeaux INP / CNRS UMR 5218). </note>
                  <p>Computing the volume of a high dimensional polytope is a fundamental problem in geometry, also connected to
          the calculation of densities of states in statistical physics, and a central building block of such algorithms
          is the method used to sample a target probability distribution.</p>
                  <p>This paper <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_chevallier-hal-03048725"/> studies Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) with
          reflections on the boundary of a domain, providing an enhanced alternative to Hit-and-run (HAR) to sample a
          target distribution restricted to the polytope. We make three contributions. First, we provide a convergence
          bound, paving the way to more precise mixing time analysis. Second, we present a robust implementation based
          on multi-precision arithmetic, a mandatory ingredient to guarantee exact predicates and robust constructions.
          We however allow controlled failures to happen, introducing the <hi rend="it">Sweeten Exact Geometric
            Computing</hi> (SEGC) paradigm. Third, we use our HMC random walk to perform H-polytope volume calculations,
          using it as an alternative to HAR within the volume algorithm by Cousins and Vempala. The systematic tests
          conducted up to dimension <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mrow>
                              <mi>n</mi>
                              <mo>=</mo>
                              <mn>100</mn>
                           </mrow>
                        </math>
                     </formula> on the cube, the isotropic and the
          standard simplex show that HMC significantly outperforms HAR both in terms of accuracy and running time.
          Additional tests show that calculations may be handled up to dimension <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mrow>
                              <mi>n</mi>
                              <mo>=</mo>
                              <mn>500</mn>
                           </mrow>
                        </math>
                     </formula>.
          These tests also establish that multiprecision is mandatory to avoid exits from the polytope.</p>
               </div>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid32">
                  <head>Overlaying a hypergraph with a graph with bounded maximum degree, with application for low-resoluton
          reconstructions of molecular assemblies</head>
                  <desc>
                     <listPerson type="participants">
                        <person>
                           <persName>
                              <forename>D.</forename>
                              <surname>Mazauric</surname>
                           </persName>
                        </person>
                     </listPerson>
                  </desc>
                  <note type="moreinfo">In collaboration with F. Havet, T. V. H. Nguyen laboratoire I3S (CNRS, Université Côte d'Azur). </note>
                  <p>We analyze a generalization of the minimum connectivity inference problem (MCI) that models the computation
          of low-resolution structures of macro-molecular assemblies, based on data obtained by native mass
          spectrometry. The generalization studied in this work, allows us to consider more refined constraints for the
          characterization of low resolution models of large assemblies, such as degree constraints (e.g. a protein has
          a limited number of other proteins in contact).</p>
                  <p>More precisely, let <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>G</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula> and <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>H</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula> be respectively a graph and a hypergraph defined on a same set of vertices,
          and let <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>F</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula> be
          a graph. We say that <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>G</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula>
                     <hi rend="it">
                        <formula rend="inline">
                           <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                              <mi>F</mi>
                           </math>
                        </formula>-overlays</hi> a hyperedge
            <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>S</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula> of
            <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>H</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula> if the
          subgraph of <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>G</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula> induced by <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>S</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula> contains <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>F</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula> as a spanning subgraph, and
          that <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>G</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula>
                     <hi rend="it">
                        <formula rend="inline">
                           <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                              <mi>F</mi>
                           </math>
                        </formula>-overlays</hi>
                     <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>H</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula> if it <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>F</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula>-overlays every hyperedge of
            <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>H</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula>. For a
          fixed graph <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>F</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula> and a fixed integer <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>k</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula>, the problem <hi rend="sc">
                        <formula rend="inline">
                           <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                              <mrow>
                                 <mo>(</mo>
                                 <mi>Δ</mi>
                                 <mo>≤</mo>
                                 <mi>k</mi>
                                 <mo>)</mo>
                              </mrow>
                           </math>
                        </formula>-<formula rend="inline">
                           <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                              <mi>F</mi>
                           </math>
                        </formula>-Overlay</hi>
          consists in deciding whether there exists a graph with maximum degree at most <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>k</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula> that <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>F</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula>-overlays a given hypergraph
            <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>H</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula>. In <ref type="simple" target="#ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_havet-hal-03368214"/>, we prove that for any graph <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>F</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula> which is neither complete
          nor anticomplete, there exists an integer <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mrow>
                              <mi>n</mi>
                              <mi>p</mi>
                              <mo>(</mo>
                              <mi>F</mi>
                              <mo>)</mo>
                           </mrow>
                        </math>
                     </formula> such that <hi rend="sc">
                        <formula rend="inline">
                           <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                              <mrow>
                                 <mo>(</mo>
                                 <mi>Δ</mi>
                                 <mo>≤</mo>
                                 <mi>k</mi>
                                 <mo>)</mo>
                              </mrow>
                           </math>
                        </formula>-<formula rend="inline">
                           <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                              <mi>F</mi>
                           </math>
                        </formula>-Overlay</hi> is
            <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mrow>
                              <mi>N</mi>
                              <mi>P</mi>
                           </mrow>
                        </math>
                     </formula>-complete for all <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mrow>
                              <mi>k</mi>
                              <mo>≥</mo>
                              <mi>n</mi>
                              <mi>p</mi>
                              <mo>(</mo>
                              <mi>F</mi>
                              <mo>)</mo>
                           </mrow>
                        </math>
                     </formula>.</p>
               </div>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid33">
                  <head>Conflict coloring problems: complexity and application to high resolution biological assembly
          modeling</head>
                  <desc>
                     <listPerson type="participants">
                        <person>
                           <persName>
                              <forename>F.</forename>
                              <surname>Cazals</surname>
                           </persName>
                        </person>
                        <person>
                           <persName>
                              <forename>D.</forename>
                              <surname>Mazauric</surname>
                           </persName>
                        </person>
                     </listPerson>
                  </desc>
                  <note type="moreinfo">In collaboration with F. Havet, T. V. H. Nguyen laboratoire I3S (CNRS, Université Côte d'Azur). </note>
                  <p>Given a graph <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mrow>
                              <mi>G</mi>
                              <mo>=</mo>
                              <mo>(</mo>
                              <mi>V</mi>
                              <mo>,</mo>
                              <mi>E</mi>
                              <mo>)</mo>
                           </mrow>
                        </math>
                     </formula>,
          a color set <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mrow>
                              <mi>C</mi>
                              <mo>(</mo>
                              <mi>v</mi>
                              <mo>)</mo>
                           </mrow>
                        </math>
                     </formula> for each vertex <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mrow>
                              <mi>v</mi>
                              <mo>.</mo>
                              <mo>∈</mo>
                              <mi>V</mi>
                           </mrow>
                        </math>
                     </formula>, a bipartite graph between
          color sets <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mrow>
                              <mi>C</mi>
                              <mo>(</mo>
                              <mi>u</mi>
                              <mo>)</mo>
                           </mrow>
                        </math>
                     </formula> and <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mrow>
                              <mi>C</mi>
                              <mo>(</mo>
                              <mi>v</mi>
                              <mo>)</mo>
                           </mrow>
                        </math>
                     </formula> for every edge <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mrow>
                              <mi>u</mi>
                              <mi>v</mi>
                              <mo>∈</mo>
                              <mi>E</mi>
                           </mrow>
                        </math>
                     </formula>, <hi rend="sc">Conflict
            Coloring</hi> consists in deciding whether exists a conflict coloring, that is a coloring in which <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mrow>
                              <mi>c</mi>
                              <mo>(</mo>
                              <mi>u</mi>
                              <mo>)</mo>
                              <mi>c</mi>
                              <mo>(</mo>
                              <mi>v</mi>
                              <mo>)</mo>
                           </mrow>
                        </math>
                     </formula>
          is not an edge of the bipartite graph. <hi rend="sc">Conflict Coloring</hi> is motivated by computational
          structural biology problems, high resolution determination of molecular assemblies. The graph represents the
          subunits and the interaction between them, the colors are the given conformations, and the edges of the
          bipartite graphs are the incompatible conformations of two subunits.</p>
                  <p>In this work, we first establish the complexity dichotomies (polynomial vs <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mrow>
                              <mi>N</mi>
                              <mi>P</mi>
                           </mrow>
                        </math>
                     </formula>-complete)
          for <hi rend="sc">Conflict Coloring</hi> and its variants. We provide some experiments in which we build
          instances of <hi rend="sc">Conflict Coloring</hi> associated to <hi rend="it">Voronoi diagram</hi> in the
          plane, and we then analyse the existences of a solution related to parameters used in our experimental
          setup.</p>
               </div>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div type="partenariat" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-cid8">
            <head>Partnerships and cooperations</head>
            <desc>
               <listPerson type="participants">
                  <person>
                     <persName>
                        <forename>F.</forename>
                        <surname>Cazals</surname>
                     </persName>
                  </person>
                  <person>
                     <persName>
                        <forename>D.</forename>
                        <surname>Mazauric</surname>
                     </persName>
                  </person>
               </listPerson>
            </desc>
            <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid34">
               <head>International research visitors</head>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid35">
                  <head>Visits of international scientists</head>
                  <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid36">
                     <head>Inria International Chair</head>
                     <list type="simple">
                        <item>David Wales, Cambridge University, is endowed chair within 3IA Côte d'Azur / ABS.</item>
                     </list>
                  </div>
               </div>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div type="diffusion" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-cid9">
            <head>Dissemination</head>
            <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid38">
               <head>Promoting scientific activities</head>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid39">
                  <head>Scientific events: organisation</head>
                  <p rend="noindent">
                     <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mo>•</mo>
                        </math>
                     </formula> Frédéric Cazals was involved in the organization of:</p>
                  <list type="simple">
                     <item>Symposium <hi rend="it">Multidisciplinary approaches in cancer research</hi>, Organized at Inria Sophia
            Antipolis Méditerranée. Web: <ref type="simple" target="https://project.inria.fr/ucancer2020/"/>.</item>
                     <item>Winter School <hi rend="it">Machine Learning Methods to Analyze and Predict Protein Structure, Dynamics
              and Function</hi>, CIRM, Luminy, November 7-12, 2021. Web: <ref type="simple" target="https://algosb2021.sciencesconf.org/"/>.</item>
                     <item>
                        <hi rend="it">Critical evaluation of methods for scoring interfaces of protein complexes</hi>, Online Elixir
            3D-Bioinfo meeting, organized by Emmanuel Levy (Elixir IL), Frederic Cazals (Elixir FR), Shoshana Wodak
            (Elixir BE).</item>
                  </list>
               </div>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid43">
                  <head>Scientific events: selection</head>
                  <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid44">
                     <head>Member of the conference program committees</head>
                     <p rend="noindent">Frédéric Cazals participated to the following program committees:</p>
                     <list type="simple">
                        <item>Symposium on Solid and Physical Modeling</item>
                        <item>Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology (ISMB) / European Conference on Computational Biology
              (ECCB)</item>
                     </list>
                  </div>
               </div>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid47">
                  <head>Invited talks</head>
                  <p rend="noindent">
                     <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mo>•</mo>
                        </math>
                     </formula> Frédéric Cazals gave the following invited talks:</p>
                  <list type="simple">
                     <item>
                        <hi rend="it">Mining protein flexibility: a new class of move sets</hi>; GDR BIM/GT MASIM, November 2021;
            UCA, 5th Academy 4 Research Webinar - Mental Retardation and Protein Dynamics, October 2021.</item>
                  </list>
               </div>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid49">
                  <head>Leadership within the scientific community</head>
                  <p rend="noindent">
                     <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mo>•</mo>
                        </math>
                     </formula> Frédéric Cazals</p>
                  <list type="simple">
                     <item>2010-...: Member of the steering committee of the GDR Bioinformatique Moléculaire, for the Structure and
            macro-molecular interactions theme.</item>
                     <item>2017-...: Co-chair, with Yann Ponty, of the working group / groupe de travail (GT MASIM - Méthodes
            Algorithmiques pour les Structures et Interactions Macromoléculaires), within the GDR de BIoinfor- matique
            Moléculaire (GDR BIM, <ref type="simple" target="https://www.gdr-bim.cnrs.fr/"/>).</item>
                  </list>
               </div>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid52">
                  <head>Research administration</head>
                  <p rend="noindent">
                     <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mo>•</mo>
                        </math>
                     </formula> Frédéric Cazals</p>
                  <list type="simple">
                     <item>2018-...: Member of the bureau du comité des équipes projets.</item>
                     <item>2020-...: Member of the bureau of the EUR Life, Université Côte d’Azur.</item>
                  </list>
                  <p rend="noindent">
                     <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mo>•</mo>
                        </math>
                     </formula> Dorian Mazauric</p>
                  <list type="simple">
                     <item>2019-...: Member of the comité Plateformes.</item>
                  </list>
               </div>
            </div>
            <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid56">
               <head>Teaching - Supervision - Juries</head>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid57">
                  <head>Teaching</head>
                  <list type="simple">
                     <item>2014–...: Master Data Sciences Program (M2), Department of Applied Mathematics, Ecole Centrale-Supélec;
              <hi rend="it">Foundations of Geometric Methods in Data Analysis</hi>; F. Cazals and M. Carrière, Inria
            Sophia / (ABS, DataShape). Web: <ref type="simple"
                             target="http://www-sop.inria.fr/abs/teaching/centrale-FGMDA/centrale-FGMDA--cazals-carriere.html"/>.</item>
                     <item>2021–...: Master Data Sciences &amp; Artificial Intelligence (M1), Université Côte d’Azur; <hi rend="it">Introduction to machine learning</hi> (course practicals); E. Sarti.</item>
                     <item>2021–...: Master Data Sciences &amp; Artificial Intelligence (M2), Université Côte d’Azur; <hi rend="it">Geometric and topological methods in machine learning</hi>; F. Cazals, J-D. Boissonnat and M. Carrière,
            Inria Sophia / (ABS, DataShape, DataShape); Web: <ref type="simple"
                             target="https://univ-cotedazur.fr/formation/offre-de-formation/msc-in-data-sciences"/>.</item>
                     <item>2021–...: Master Cancérologie et Recherche Translationnelle (M2), Université Côte d’Azur; <hi rend="it">Binding affinity maturation and protein interaction network analysis: two examples of bioinformatics
              applications in medicine</hi>; F. Cazals.</item>
                     <item>2020–...: Master Sciences du Vivant (M2), parcours Biologie, Informatique, Mathématiques, Université Côte
            d’Azur; <hi rend="it">Introduction to statistical physics of biomolecules</hi>; F. Cazals.</item>
                     <item>2018–...: Master : Algorithmique et Complexité, 23h30 TD, niveau M1, Polytech Nice Sophia, Université Côte
            d'Azur, filière Sciences Informatiques, France; Dorian Mazauric.</item>
                  </list>
               </div>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid64">
                  <head>Supervision</head>
                  <p>PhD thesis:</p>
                  <list type="simple">
                     <item>
                        <hi rend="bold">PhD in progress, 3rd year:</hi> Timothée O'Donnel, <hi rend="it">Modeling the influenza
              polymerase</hi>. Université Côte d'Azur. Thesis co-supervised by Frédéric Cazals and Bernard Delmas, INRA
            Jouy-en-Josas.</item>
                     <item>
                        <hi rend="bold">Defended PhD:</hi> Thi Viet Ha Nguyen, <hi rend="it">Graph Algorithms techniques for (low
              and high) resolution models of large protein assemblies</hi>. Université Côte d'Azur. Thesis co-supervised
            by Frédéric Havet, Laboratoire I3S (CNRS, Université Côte d'Azur).</item>
                  </list>
                  <p>Interns:</p>
                  <list type="simple">
                     <item>Aarushi Gupta, intern from IIT Delhi, summer 2021. <hi rend="it">Modeling protein backbone flexibility
              using solutions of the tripeptide loop closure.</hi>
                     </item>
                     <item>Louis Goldenberg, intern from Ecole Polytechnique, summer 2021. <hi rend="it">Parametric models for
              compact clusters.</hi>
                     </item>
                     <item>Sebastián Gallardo Diaz, Universidad Técnica Federico Santa Marı́a, Valparaı́so, Chile. Advisors: Pierre
            Kornprobst (Inria project-team Biovision), Dorian Mazauric. <hi rend="it">Algorithms for a new packing
              problem : Towards Reading Accessible Newspapers</hi>.</item>
                     <item>Vivian Losciale, Université Côte d'Azur. Advisors: Jérémy Camponovo, Frédéric Havet, Buntheng Ly, Dorian
            Mazauric, Maxime Sermesant.<hi rend="it">Jeux-vidéos de médiation : Intelligence artificielle pour
              l’imagerie médicale</hi>.</item>
                     <item>Quentin Larose, Université Côte d'Azur. Advisors: Agnès Bessière, Carole Clastres, Jérémy Camponovo, Luc
            Hogie, Dorian Mazauric, Eric Pascual, Sandrine Selosse, Brigitte Trousse. <hi rend="it">Portail des
              ressources Terra Numerica</hi>.</item>
                  </list>
               </div>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid72">
                  <head>Juries</head>
                  <p rend="noindent">Frédéric Cazals participated to the following committees:</p>
                  <list type="simple">
                     <item>Luke Dicks, Cambridge University, April 2021. Rapporteur for the PhD thesis <hi rend="it">K-means
              landscapes: exploring clustering solution spaces using energy landscape theory</hi>. Advisor: David
            Wales.</item>
                     <item>Manon Ruffini, Univ. of Toulouse, March 2021. Rapporteur on the PhD thesis <hi rend="it">Models and
              Algorithms for Computational Protein Design</hi>. Advisor: Thomas Schiex.</item>
                     <item>Dorian Mazauric, Habilitation thesis, Université Côte d'Azur, November 2021. Committee member (president)
            for the habilitation <hi rend="it">Algorithmique des graphes pour les réseaux et la biologie structurale
              computationnelle</hi>.</item>
                  </list>
                  <p rend="noindent">Dorian Mazauric participated to the following committees:</p>
                  <list type="simple">
                     <item>Thi Viet Ha Nguyen, Université Côte d'Azur, December 2021. Committee member for the PhD thesis <hi rend="it">Graph Algorithms techniques for (low and high) resolution models of large protein
              assemblies</hi>. Advisors: Frédéric Havet, Dorian Mazauric.</item>
                  </list>
               </div>
            </div>
            <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid77">
               <head>Popularization</head>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid78">
                  <head>Internal or external Inria responsibilities</head>
                  <p rend="noindent">Dorian Mazauric:</p>
                  <list type="simple">
                     <item>2019–...: Head of Commission <ref type="simple" target="https://project.inria.fr/mastic/"/> (Médiation et Animation des
            MAthématiques, des Sciences et Techniques Informatiques et des Communications), Inria Sophia Antipolis -
            Méditerranée.</item>
                     <item>2019–...: Coordinator of <ref type="simple" target="https://terra-numerica.org"/>, an ambitious scientific
            popularisation project. Its main goal is to create a "Dedicated Digital space" in the south of France, (in
            the spirit of the "Cité des Sciences" or "Palais de la découverte" in Paris). To do so, Terra Numerica is
            developing and structuring popularisation activities, supports which are spread in different antennas
            throughout the territory (e.g. Espace Terra Numerica - Valbonne Sophia Antipolis, MIA, in schools,
            exhibition extensions...). This large-scale project involves (brings together) all the actors of research,
            education, industry, associations and collectivities... It is actually composed of more than one hundred
            people.</item>
                     <item>2018–...: Member of the Conseil d'Administration de l'association les Petits Débrouillards.</item>
                     <item>2017–...: Member of projet de médiation Galéjade : Graphes et ALgorithmes : Ensemble de Jeux À Destination
            des Ecoliers... (mais pas que).</item>
                  </list>
               </div>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid83">
                  <head>Articles and contents</head>
                  <p rend="noindent">Frédéric Cazals:</p>
                  <list type="simple">
                     <item>Podcast <hi rend="it">Investiga’Sciences </hi>
                        <hi rend="tt">Vive la protéine</hi>: interview-discussion of
            Thomas Schiex and myself by Valérie Ravinet, October 2021. <ref type="simple"
                             target="https://podcast.ausha.co/investiga-sciences/investiga-sciences-9-vive-la-proteine"/>.</item>
                  </list>
                  <p rend="noindent">Dorian Mazauric:</p>
                  <list type="simple">
                     <item>Participation to the development of <ref type="simple" target="https://terra-numerica.org/ressources/"/>.</item>
                     <item>Participation to the development of popularization videos games <ref type="simple"
                             target="https://terra-numerica.org/ateliers-et-jeux-en-ligne/"/>.</item>
                  </list>
               </div>
               <div type="subsection" xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-uid87">
                  <head>Interventions</head>
                  <p rend="noindent">Dorian Mazauric - Fête de la Science 2021:</p>
                  <list type="simple">
                     <item>Village des Sciences de Villeneuve-Loubet Avec Pobot. Samedi 02 octobre 2021 et dimanche 03 octobre 2021.
            With Thomas Dissaux, Adrien Gausseran, Nicolas Nisse, Eric Pascual, Lucas Picassari-Arrieta, Brigitte
            Trousse.</item>
                     <item>Village des sciences de la vallée de la Vésubie avec Les Apprentis Pas Sages Samedi 02 octobre 2021. <hi rend="it">Puzzle du nid d’abeilles – Graphes et algorithmes grandeur nature</hi>. With Samantha
            Lanney-Ricci, Magali Martin-Mazauric.</item>
                     <item>Interventions au Campus International de Valbonne Lundi 04 octobre 2021. <hi rend="it">La magie du binaire
              – Pas besoin de réfléchir, les ordinateurs calculent tellement vite ? Problèmes actuels en
              algorithmique</hi>. With Estelle Zavoli.</item>
                     <item>Atelier scientifique à l’Espace d’Art Concret (EAC), Mouans-Sartoux Organisé par l’EAC (Amandine Briand,
            Sabrina Lah, Martin Merle, Claire Spada, Brigitte Segatori, Roubaud). Du lundi 04 octobre 2021 au vendredi
            08 octobre 2021. <hi rend="it">Des reines sur une oeuvre d’art (Tenth Copper Corner une oeuvre minimaliste
              de Carl André formée de 55 carreaux) : mathématiques et algorithmique</hi>. With Frédéric Havet, Nicolas
            Nisse, Martine Olivi. En collaboration avec Geoffroy Aubry et Valérie Doya (atelier de Physique).</item>
                     <item>Intervention au collège La chênaie de Mouans-Sartoux Mercredi 06 octobre 2021. <hi rend="it">La magie des
              graphes et du binaire – Pas besoin de réfléchir, les ordinateurs calculent tellement vite ? Problèmes
              actuels en algorithmique</hi>. With Mylène Raibaudi, Brigitte Trousse.</item>
                     <item>Village des Sciences de Mouans-Sartoux Samedi 09 octobre 2021. Sabrina Barnabé, Martine Olivi, Brigitte
            Trousse, Thierry Viéville.</item>
                     <item>Festival des sciences de Nice d’Université Côte d’Azur Samedi 09 octobre 2021 et dimanche 10 octobre 2021.
            With Alexandre Bonlarron, Foivos Fioravantes, Victor Jung, Hicham Lesfari, Steve Malalel, Magali
            Martin-Mazauric, Romain Michelucci, Nicolas Nisse, Marie Pelleau, Nina Singlan, Rudan Xiao.</item>
                     <item>Interventions au collège de Roquebillière Jeudi 07 octobre 2021. <hi rend="it">La magie des graphes et du
              binaire – Jeux combinatoires – Pas besoin de réfléchir, les ordinateurs calculent tellement vite ?
              Problèmes actuels en algorithmique – Ateliers Jeux Graphes et Algorithmes</hi>. With Samantha
            Lanney-Ricci.</item>
                     <item>Conférence à la médiathèque de Biot Vendredi 08 octobre 2021.</item>
                     <item>Village des Sciences et de l’Innovation de la CASA à Antibes Juan-les-Pins Avec PoBot, SLV, @b4games.
            Samedi 16 octobre 2021 et dimanche 17 octobre 2021. With Agnès Bessière, Armel Berceliot, Étienne Chaplain,
            Thomas Dissaux, Thierry Lespinasse, Stéphane Mansour, Magali Martin-Mazauric, Nicolas Nisse, Eric Pascual,
            Lucas Picassari-Arrieta, Frédéric Rallo, Sandrine Selosse, Brigitte Trousse.</item>
                  </list>
                  <p rend="noindent">Dorian Mazauric - Interventions at Maison de l'Intelligence Artificielle:</p>
                  <list type="simple">
                     <item>Ateliers Terra Numerica avec les étudiants du Master SmartEdTech. Mercredi 14 avril 2021. Journée
            intensive de formation hybride et animation et co-création d’ateliers. With Saint-Clair Lefevre, Frédéric
            Havet, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville.</item>
                  </list>
                  <p rend="noindent">Dorian Mazauric - Cordées de la réussite (coordonné par Université Côte d'Azur):</p>
                  <list type="simple">
                     <item>Deux classes du collège Henri Nans, Aups. Les sciences du numérique à portée de mains ! Découvrir,
            Explorer, Expérimenter ! <hi rend="it">Pirates et trésor : des maths et des algorithmes à la programmation
              Scratch et mBot</hi>. With Frédéric Havet, Eric Pascual, Brigitte Trousse.</item>
                  </list>
                  <p rend="noindent">Dorian Mazauric - Programme Chiche:</p>
                  <list type="simple">
                     <item>Intervention au lycée Apollinaire, Nice Jeudi 14 octobre 2021.</item>
                     <item>Intervention au lycée Estienne d’Orves, Nice Jeudi 21 octobre 2021.</item>
                     <item>Intervention au CIV, Valbonne Sophia Antipolis Jeudi 02 décembre 2021.</item>
                  </list>
                  <p rend="noindent">Dorian Mazauric - Formations:</p>
                  <list type="simple">
                     <item>Formation d’enseignants co-organisée par la DANE et Terra Numerica avec les ateliers Terra Numerica à la
            Maison de l’intelligence Artificielle. Mardi 9 mars 2021, mardi 23 mars 2021, mardi 6 avril 2021, mardi 20
            avril 2021, mardi 25 mai 2021. <hi rend="it">Machine d’apprentissage par renforcement pour gagner aux jeux,
              Initiation à la reconnaissance d’images avec des drones, ateliers d’informatique débranchée</hi>. With
            Jérémy Camponovo, Frédéric Havet, Eric Pascual, Brigitte Trousse.</item>
                     <item>Formation de personnels de médiathèques de la CASA. Vendredi 25 juin 2021, jeudi 23 septembre 2021.
            Formation sur les <hi rend="it">fondements de l’informatique : Transmission de pensée – La magie du
              binaire</hi>.</item>
                     <item>Présentation et formation au Fab’Ecole 06 de la DRANE, collège Bertone d’Antibes. Vendredi 26 novembre
            2021. Présentation et formation sur des ateliers Terra Numerica. With Brigitte Trousse.</item>
                  </list>
                  <p rend="noindent">Dorian Mazauric - In schools:</p>
                  <list type="simple">
                     <item>Collège Bechet d’Antibes Juan-les-Pins Lundi 8 mars 2021. Dans le cadre du projet pédagogique Ethique des
            données et de l’information (1/3). Introductions aux algorithmes. With Sylvain Etienne, Frédéric Giroire,
            Géraldine Rouard, Brigitte Trousse.</item>
                     <item>Centre International de Valbonne Sophia Antipolis Lundi 15 mars 2021. Dans le cadre de séances autour de
              l’<hi rend="it">Intelligence Artificielle</hi> avec une classe de terminale du CIV organisées par Les
            Petits Débrouillards. Intelligence Artificielle et reconnaissance d’images. With Marie Barbieux, Marine
            Beaudet, Soledad Tolosa.</item>
                     <item>Collège Bechet d’Antibes Juan-les-Pins Vendredi 26 mars 2021 et 9 avril 2021. Dans le cadre du projet
            pédagogique Ethique des données et de l’information (2/3). <hi rend="it">Modélisation d’un réseau social et
              de contenus, et algorithmes de recommandation</hi>. With Sylvain Etienne, Frédéric Giroire, Géraldine
            Rouard, Brigitte Trousse.</item>
                     <item>Collège Bechet d’Antibes Juan-les-Pins Lundi 7 juin 2021. Dans le cadre du projet pédagogique Ethique des
            données et de l’information (3/3). Conférence <hi rend="it">Protection des données et métier de Déléguée à
              la Protection des Données d’Inria</hi> (Anne Combe). With Anne Combe, Sylvain Etienne, Frédéric Giroire,
            Géraldine Rouard, Brigitte Trousse.</item>
                     <item>Roquefort-les-Pins Dans le cadre des activités du centre aéré de la commune. Lundi 26 juillet 2021 et
            mardi 27 juillet 2021. Trois demi-journées : <hi rend="it">ateliers d’informatique débranchée (pour les 3 à
              6 ans), ateliers pour découvrir les algorithmes de recommandation dans les réseaux sociaux (pour les
              adolescents) et tours de magie pour découvrir comment l’ordinateur compte (pour les 6 à 10 ans)</hi>. With
            Frédéric Havet.</item>
                     <item>Lycée Internationale de Valbonne Jeudi 02 décembre 2021. <hi rend="it">Ateliers algorithmiques grandeur
              nature</hi>. With Bérengère Abric, Perrine Le Dûs.</item>
                  </list>
                  <p rend="noindent">Dorian Mazauric - Internships:</p>
                  <list type="simple">
                     <item>Treize stagiaires de troisième au centre Inria d’Université Côte d’Azur Du lundi 13 décembre au vendredi
            17 décembre 2021.</item>
                  </list>
               </div>
            </div>
         </div>
      </body>
      <back>
         <div xml:id="ABS-RA-2021-cid10" n="10" type="bibliography">
            <head>{@titre}</head>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="refer"
                        n="refercite:m:bermond:hal-01977266"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-bermond-hal-01977266">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Distributed Link Scheduling in Wireless Networks</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">V.</forename>
                        <forename>Vishal</forename>
                        <persName>Misra</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">P.</forename>
                        <forename>Philippe</forename>
                        <persName>Nain</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="hal">hal-01977266</idno>
                  <idno type="doi">10.1142/S1793830920500585%EF%BB%BF</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">Discrete Mathematics, Algorithms and Applications</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>2020</date>
                     <biblScope unit="volume">12</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="number">5</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">1-38</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="refer"
                        n="refercite:m:boissonnat:hal-01259806"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-boissonnat-hal-01259806">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">On the complexity of the representation of simplicial complexes by trees</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">J.-D.</forename>
                        <forename>Jean-Daniel</forename>
                        <persName>Boissonnat</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="hal">hal-01259806</idno>
                  <idno type="doi">10.1016/j.tcs.2015.12.034</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">Theoretical Computer Science</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>February 2016</date>
                     <biblScope unit="volume">617</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">17</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="refer"
                        n="refercite:m:energy2016carr"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-energy2016carr">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Energy landscapes and persistent minima</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">J.</forename>
                        <forename>J.</forename>
                        <persName>Carr</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">D.</forename>
                        <forename>D.</forename>
                        <persName>Mazauric</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">F.</forename>
                        <forename>F.</forename>
                        <persName>Cazals</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">D. J.</forename>
                        <forename>D. J.</forename>
                        <persName>Wales</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="doi">10.1063/1.4941052</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">The Journal of Chemical Physics</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>2016</date>
                     <biblScope unit="volume">144</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="number">5</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">4</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="refer"
                        n="refercite:m:cazals2015conformational"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-cazals2015conformational">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Conformational Ensembles and Sampled Energy Landscapes: Analysis and Comparison</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">F.</forename>
                        <forename>F.</forename>
                        <persName>Cazals</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">T.</forename>
                        <forename>T.</forename>
                        <persName>Dreyfus</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">D.</forename>
                        <forename>D.</forename>
                        <persName>Mazauric</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">A.</forename>
                        <forename>A.</forename>
                        <persName>Roth</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">C.</forename>
                        <forename>C.H.</forename>
                        <persName>Robert</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="doi">10.1002/jcc.23913</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">J. of Computational Chemistry</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>2015</date>
                     <biblScope unit="volume">36</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="number">16</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">1213--1231</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="report"
                        rend="refer"
                        n="refercite:m:cazals:hal-01379635"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-cazals-hal-01379635">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">The Structural Bioinformatics Library: modeling in biomolecular science and beyond</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">F.</forename>
                        <forename>Frédéric</forename>
                        <persName>Cazals</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">T.</forename>
                        <forename>Tom</forename>
                        <persName>Dreyfus</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="hal">hal-01379635</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>October 2016</date>
                     <biblScope unit="number">RR-8957</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="inproceedings"
                        rend="refer"
                        n="refercite:m:cazals:hal-01245408"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-cazals-hal-01245408">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Beyond Two-sample-tests: Localizing Data Discrepancies in High-dimensional Spaces</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">F.</forename>
                        <forename>Frédéric</forename>
                        <persName>Cazals</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="hal">hal-01245408</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="s">IEEE/ACM International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics</title>
                  <title level="m">IEEE/ACM International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics</title>
                  <meeting>
                     <placeName>Paris, France</placeName>
                  </meeting>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>March 2015</date>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">29</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="inproceedings"
                        rend="refer"
                        n="refercite:m:cazals:hal-02425602"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-cazals-hal-02425602">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Low-Complexity Nonparametric Bayesian Online Prediction with Universal Guarantees</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">F.</forename>
                        <forename>Frédéric</forename>
                        <persName>Cazals</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="hal">hal-02425602</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="m">NeurIPS 2019 - Thirty-third Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems</title>
                  <meeting>
                     <placeName>Vancouver, Canada</placeName>
                  </meeting>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>December 2019</date>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="refer"
                        n="refercite:m:cazals:hal-02425599"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-cazals-hal-02425599">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Comparing Two Clusterings Using Matchings between Clusters of Clusters</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">F.</forename>
                        <forename>Frédéric</forename>
                        <persName>Cazals</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">D.</forename>
                        <forename>Dorian</forename>
                        <persName>Mazauric</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">R.</forename>
                        <forename>Romain</forename>
                        <persName>Tetley</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">R.</forename>
                        <forename>Rémi</forename>
                        <persName>Watrigant</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="hal">hal-02425599</idno>
                  <idno type="doi">10.1145/3345951</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">ACM Journal of Experimental Algorithmics</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>December 2019</date>
                     <biblScope unit="volume">24</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="number">1</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">1-41</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="refer"
                        n="refercite:m:cohen:hal-01947563"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-cohen-hal-01947563">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Complexity dichotomies for the Minimum F -Overlay problem</title>
                  <author/>
                  <idno type="hal">hal-01947563</idno>
                  <idno type="doi">10.1016/j.jda.2018.11.010</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">Journal of Discrete Algorithms</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>September 2018</date>
                     <biblScope unit="volume">52-53</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">133-142</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="refer"
                        n="refercite:m:lheritier:hal-01968190"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-lheritier-hal-01968190">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">A Sequential Non-Parametric Multivariate Two-Sample Test</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">F.</forename>
                        <forename>Frédéric</forename>
                        <persName>Cazals</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="hal">hal-01968190</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">IEEE Transactions on Information Theory</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>May 2018</date>
                     <biblScope unit="volume">64</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="number">5</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">3361-3370</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="report"
                        rend="refer"
                        n="refercite:m:marillet:hal-01159641"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-marillet-hal-01159641">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">High Resolution Crystal Structures Leverage Protein Binding Affinity Predictions</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">S.</forename>
                        <forename>Simon</forename>
                        <persName>Marillet</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">F.</forename>
                        <forename>Frédéric</forename>
                        <persName>Cazals</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="hal">hal-01159641</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>March 2015</date>
                     <biblScope unit="number">RR-8733</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="refer"
                        n="refercite:m:marillet:hal-01675467"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-marillet-hal-01675467">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Novel Structural Parameters of Ig–Ag Complexes Yield a Quantitative Description of Interaction
          Specificity and Binding Affinity</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">S.</forename>
                        <forename>Simon</forename>
                        <persName>Marillet</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">M.-P.</forename>
                        <forename>Marie-Paule</forename>
                        <persName>Lefranc</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">F.</forename>
                        <forename>Frédéric</forename>
                        <persName>Cazals</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="hal">hal-01675467</idno>
                  <idno type="doi">10.3389/fimmu.2017.00034</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">Frontiers in Immunology</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>February 2017</date>
                     <biblScope unit="volume">8</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">34</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="refer"
                        n="refercite:m:roth2016hybridizing"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-roth2016hybridizing">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Hybridizing rapidly growing random trees and basin hopping yields an improved exploration of
          energy landscapes</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">A.</forename>
                        <forename>A.</forename>
                        <persName>Roth</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">T.</forename>
                        <forename>T.</forename>
                        <persName>Dreyfus</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">C.</forename>
                        <forename>C.H.</forename>
                        <persName>Robert</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">F.</forename>
                        <forename>F.</forename>
                        <persName>Cazals</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="doi">10.1002/jcc.24256</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">J. Comp. Chem.</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>2016</date>
                     <biblScope unit="volume">37</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="number">8</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">739--752</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="refer"
                        n="refercite:m:simsir:hal-03006981"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_m-simsir-hal-03006981">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Studying dynamics without explicit dynamics: A structure‐based study of the export mechanism by
          AcrB</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">I.</forename>
                        <forename>Isabelle</forename>
                        <persName>Mus‐Veteau</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">F.</forename>
                        <forename>Frédéric</forename>
                        <persName>Cazals</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="hal">hal-03006981</idno>
                  <idno type="doi">10.1002/prot.26012</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">Proteins - Structure, Function and Bioinformatics</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>September 2020</date>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="year"
                        n="cite:bereux:hal-03387889"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_bereux-hal-03387889">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Boosting the analysis of protein interfaces with Multiple Interface String Alignments:
          illustration on the spikes of coronaviruses</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">S.</forename>
                        <forename>Stéphane</forename>
                        <persName>Bereux</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">B.</forename>
                        <forename>B</forename>
                        <persName>Delmas</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">F.</forename>
                        <forename>Frédéric</forename>
                        <persName>Cazals</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="hal">hal-03387889</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">Proteins - Structure, Function and Bioinformatics</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>November 2021</date>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="year"
                        n="cite:chevallier:hal-03048725"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_chevallier-hal-03048725">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Improved polytope volume calculations based on Hamiltonian Monte Carlo with boundary
          reflections and sweet arithmetics</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">A.</forename>
                        <forename>Augustin</forename>
                        <persName>Chevallier</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">F.</forename>
                        <forename>Frédéric</forename>
                        <persName>Cazals</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="hal">hal-03048725</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">Journal of Computational Geometry</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>2022</date>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="year"
                        n="cite:odonnell:hal-03232851"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_odonnell-hal-03232851">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Tripeptide loop closure: a detailed study of reconstructions based on Ramachandran
          distributions</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">T.</forename>
                        <forename>T</forename>
                        <persName>O'donnell</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">C. H.</forename>
                        <forename>C H</forename>
                        <persName>Robert</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">F.</forename>
                        <forename>F</forename>
                        <persName>Cazals</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="hal">hal-03232851</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">Proteins - Structure, Function and Bioinformatics</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>2022</date>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="inproceedings"
                        rend="year"
                        n="cite:cazals:hal-03183028"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_cazals-hal-03183028">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Fréchet mean and <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mi>p</mi>
                        </math>
                     </formula>-mean on the unit circle: decidability, algorithm, and applications to
          clustering on the flat torus</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">F.</forename>
                        <forename>Frédéric</forename>
                        <persName>Cazals</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">B.</forename>
                        <forename>B</forename>
                        <persName>Delmas</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">T.</forename>
                        <forename>Timothee</forename>
                        <persName>O'donnell</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="hal">hal-03183028</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="m">SEA 2021 - 19th Symposium on Experimental Algorithms</title>
                  <meeting>
                     <placeName>Sophia Antipolis, France</placeName>
                  </meeting>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>June 2021</date>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="thesis"
                        rend="year"
                        n="cite:mazauric:tel-03506086"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_mazauric-tel-03506086">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Graph Algorithm Techniques for Networks and Computational Structural Biology</title>
                  <author/>
                  <idno type="hal">tel-03506086</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>November 2021</date>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="thesis"
                        rend="year"
                        n="cite:nguyen:hal-03510188"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_nguyen-hal-03510188">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Graph problems motivated by (low and high) resolution models of large protein
          assemblies</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">V.-H.</forename>
                        <forename>Viet-Ha</forename>
                        <persName>Nguyen</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="hal">hal-03510188</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>December 2021</date>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="report"
                        rend="year"
                        n="cite:alizon:hal-03170023"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_alizon-hal-03170023">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">SARS-CoV-2 Through the Lens of Computational Biology:How bioinformatics is playing a key role
          in the study of the virus and its origins</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">F.</forename>
                        <forename>Frédéric</forename>
                        <persName>Cazals</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="hal">hal-03170023</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>March 2021</date>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">1-35</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="report"
                        rend="year"
                        n="cite:havet:hal-03368214"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_havet-hal-03368214">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">On the complexity of overlaying a hypergraph with a graph with bounded maximum degree</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">F.</forename>
                        <forename>Frédéric</forename>
                        <persName>Havet</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">D.</forename>
                        <forename>Dorian</forename>
                        <persName>Mazauric</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">V.-H.</forename>
                        <forename>Viet-Ha</forename>
                        <persName>Nguyen</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="hal">hal-03368214</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>2021</date>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="misc"
                        rend="year"
                        n="cite:lemoigne:hal-03521911"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_lemoigne-hal-03521911">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Crystal structure of chloroplast fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase from the green alga
          Chlamydomonas reinhardtii</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">T.</forename>
                        <forename>Théo</forename>
                        <persName>Le Moigne</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">E.</forename>
                        <forename>Edoardo</forename>
                        <persName>Sarti</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">A.</forename>
                        <forename>Antonin</forename>
                        <persName>Nourisson</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">A.</forename>
                        <forename>Alessandra</forename>
                        <persName>Carbone</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">J.</forename>
                        <forename>Julien</forename>
                        <persName>Henri</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="hal">hal-03521911</idno>
                  <idno type="doi">10.1101/2021.12.28.474321</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>January 2022</date>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="misc"
                        rend="year"
                        n="cite:salesdequeiroz:hal-03438430"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_salesdequeiroz-hal-03438430">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Gene prioritization based on random walks with restarts and absorbing states, to define gene
          sets regulating drug pharmacodynamics from single-cell analyses</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">A.</forename>
                        <forename>Augusto</forename>
                        <persName>Sales-De-Queiroz</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">G. G.</forename>
                        <forename>Guilherme Guilherme</forename>
                        <persName>Sales Santa Cruz</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">A.</forename>
                        <forename>Alain</forename>
                        <persName>Jean-Marie</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">D.</forename>
                        <forename>Dorian</forename>
                        <persName>Mazauric</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">F.</forename>
                        <forename>Frédéric</forename>
                        <persName>Cazals</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="hal">hal-03438430</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>November 2021</date>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="foot"
                        n="footcite:adcock2006molecular"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_adcock2006molecular">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Molecular dynamics: survey of methods for simulating the activity of proteins</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">S.</forename>
                        <forename>S.A.</forename>
                        <persName>Adcock</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">A.</forename>
                        <forename>A.J.</forename>
                        <persName>McCammon</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">Chemical reviews</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>2006</date>
                     <biblScope unit="volume">106</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="number">5</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">1589--1615</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="foot"
                        n="footcite:aal-manpc-07"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_aal-manpc-07">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">The molecular architecture of the nuclear pore complex</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">F.</forename>
                        <forename>F.</forename>
                        <persName>Alber</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">S.</forename>
                        <forename>S.</forename>
                        <persName>Dokudovskaya</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">L.</forename>
                        <forename>L.M.</forename>
                        <persName>Veenhoff</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">W.</forename>
                        <forename>W.</forename>
                        <persName>Zhang</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">J.</forename>
                        <forename>J.</forename>
                        <persName>Kipper</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">D.</forename>
                        <forename>D.</forename>
                        <persName>Devos</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">A.</forename>
                        <forename>A.</forename>
                        <persName>Suprapto</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">O.</forename>
                        <forename>O.</forename>
                        <persName>Karni-Schmidt</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">R.</forename>
                        <forename>R.</forename>
                        <persName>Williams</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">B.</forename>
                        <forename>B.T.</forename>
                        <persName>Chait</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">A.</forename>
                        <forename>A.</forename>
                        <persName>Sali</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">M.</forename>
                        <forename>M.P.</forename>
                        <persName>Rout</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">Nature</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>2007</date>
                     <biblScope unit="volume">450</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="number">7170</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">695--701</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="foot"
                        n="footcite:ball1999dynamics"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_ball1999dynamics">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Dynamics on statistical samples of potential energy surfaces</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">K.</forename>
                        <forename>K.D.</forename>
                        <persName>Ball</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">R.</forename>
                        <forename>R.S.</forename>
                        <persName>Berry</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">The Journal of chemical physics</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>1999</date>
                     <biblScope unit="volume">111</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="number">5</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">2060--2070</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="book"
                        rend="foot"
                        n="footcite:callen1985thermodynamics"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_callen1985thermodynamics">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Thermodynamics and an Introduction to Thermostatistics</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">H.</forename>
                        <forename>H.B.</forename>
                        <persName>Callen</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>1985</date>
                     <publisher>Wiley</publisher>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="foot"
                        n="footcite:cao2020novo"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_cao2020novo">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">De novo design of picomolar SARS-CoV-2 miniprotein inhibitors</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">L.</forename>
                        <forename>L.</forename>
                        <persName>Cao</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">I.</forename>
                        <forename>I.</forename>
                        <persName>Goreshnik</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">B.</forename>
                        <forename>B.</forename>
                        <persName>Coventry</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">J.</forename>
                        <forename>J.B.</forename>
                        <persName>Case</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">L.</forename>
                        <forename>L.</forename>
                        <persName>Miller</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">L.</forename>
                        <forename>L.</forename>
                        <persName>Kozodoy</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">R.</forename>
                        <forename>R.</forename>
                        <persName>Chen</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">L.</forename>
                        <forename>L.</forename>
                        <persName>Carter</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">A.</forename>
                        <forename>A.</forename>
                        <persName>Walls</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">Y.-J.</forename>
                        <forename>Y-J.</forename>
                        <persName>Park</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">E.-M.</forename>
                        <forename>E-M</forename>
                        <persName>Strauch</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">L.</forename>
                        <forename>L.</forename>
                        <persName>Stewart</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">M.</forename>
                        <forename>M.S.</forename>
                        <persName>Diamond</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">D.</forename>
                        <forename>D.</forename>
                        <persName>Veesler</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">D.</forename>
                        <forename>D.</forename>
                        <persName>Baker</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">Science</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>2020</date>
                     <biblScope unit="volume">370</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="number">6515</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">426--431</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="foot"
                        n="footcite:energy2016carr"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_energy2016carr">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Energy landscapes and persistent minima</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">J.</forename>
                        <forename>J.</forename>
                        <persName>Carr</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">D.</forename>
                        <forename>D.</forename>
                        <persName>Mazauric</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">F.</forename>
                        <forename>F.</forename>
                        <persName>Cazals</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">D. J.</forename>
                        <forename>D. J.</forename>
                        <persName>Wales</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="doi">10.1063/1.4941052</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">The Journal of Chemical Physics</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>2016</date>
                     <biblScope unit="volume">144</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="number">5</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">4</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="foot"
                        n="footcite:cousins2016practical"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_cousins2016practical">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">A practical volume algorithm</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">B.</forename>
                        <forename>B.</forename>
                        <persName>Cousins</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">S.</forename>
                        <forename>S.</forename>
                        <persName>Vempala</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">Mathematical Programming Computation</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>2016</date>
                     <biblScope unit="volume">8</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="number">2</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">133--160</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="book"
                        rend="foot"
                        n="footcite:frenkel2002understanding"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_frenkel2002understanding">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Understanding molecular simulation</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">D.</forename>
                        <forename>D.</forename>
                        <persName>Frenkel</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">B.</forename>
                        <forename>B.</forename>
                        <persName>Smit</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>2002</date>
                     <publisher>Academic Press</publisher>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="foot"
                        n="footcite:kannan1997random"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_kannan1997random">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Random walks and an <formula rend="inline">
                        <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
                           <mrow>
                              <msup>
                                 <mi>O</mi>
                                 <mo>*</mo>
                              </msup>
                              <mrow>
                                 <mo>(</mo>
                              </mrow>
                              <msup>
                                 <mi>n</mi>
                                 <mn>5</mn>
                              </msup>
                           </mrow>
                        </math>
                     </formula>) volume algorithm for convex bodies</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">R.</forename>
                        <forename>R.</forename>
                        <persName>Kannan</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">L.</forename>
                        <forename>L.</forename>
                        <persName>Lovász</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">M.</forename>
                        <forename>M.</forename>
                        <persName>Simonovits</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">Random Structures &amp; Algorithms</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>1997</date>
                     <biblScope unit="volume">11</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="number">1</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">1--50</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="book"
                        rend="foot"
                        n="footcite:landau2014guide"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_landau2014guide">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">A guide to Monte Carlo simulations in statistical physics</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">D.</forename>
                        <forename>D.</forename>
                        <persName>Landau</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">K.</forename>
                        <forename>K.</forename>
                        <persName>Binder</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>2014</date>
                     <publisher>Cambridge university press</publisher>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="book"
                        rend="foot"
                        n="footcite:lelievre2010free"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_lelievre2010free">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Free energy computations: A mathematical perspective</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">T.</forename>
                        <forename>T.</forename>
                        <persName>Lelièvre</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">G.</forename>
                        <forename>G.</forename>
                        <persName>Stoltz</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">M.</forename>
                        <forename>M.</forename>
                        <persName>Rousset</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>2010</date>
                     <publisher>World Scientific</publisher>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="foot"
                        n="footcite:schon2009prediction"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_schon2009prediction">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Prediction, determination and validation of phase diagrams via the global study of energy
          landscapes</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">C.</forename>
                        <forename>C.</forename>
                        <persName>Schön</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">M.</forename>
                        <forename>M.</forename>
                        <persName>Jansen</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">Int. J. of Materials Research</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>2009</date>
                     <biblScope unit="volume">100</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="number">2</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">135</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="foot"
                        n="footcite:senior2020improved"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_senior2020improved">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Improved protein structure prediction using potentials from deep learning</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">A.</forename>
                        <forename>A.</forename>
                        <persName>Senior</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">R.</forename>
                        <forename>R.</forename>
                        <persName>Evans</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">J.</forename>
                        <forename>J.</forename>
                        <persName>Jumper</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">J.</forename>
                        <forename>J.</forename>
                        <persName>Kirkpatrick</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">L.</forename>
                        <forename>L.</forename>
                        <persName>Sifre</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">T.</forename>
                        <forename>T.</forename>
                        <persName>Green</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">C.</forename>
                        <forename>C.</forename>
                        <persName>Qin</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">A.</forename>
                        <forename>A.</forename>
                        <persName>Żídek</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">A.</forename>
                        <forename>A.</forename>
                        <persName>Nelson</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">A.</forename>
                        <forename>A.</forename>
                        <persName>Bridgland</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">H.</forename>
                        <forename>H.</forename>
                        <persName>Penedones</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">S.</forename>
                        <forename>S.</forename>
                        <persName>Petersen</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">K.</forename>
                        <forename>K.</forename>
                        <persName>Simonyan</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">S.</forename>
                        <forename>S.</forename>
                        <persName>Crossan</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">K.</forename>
                        <forename>K.</forename>
                        <persName>Pushmeet</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">D.</forename>
                        <forename>D.</forename>
                        <persName>Jones</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">D.</forename>
                        <forename>D.</forename>
                        <persName>Silver</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">K.</forename>
                        <forename>K.</forename>
                        <persName>Kavukcuoglu</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">D.</forename>
                        <forename>D.</forename>
                        <persName>Hassabis</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">Nature</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>2020</date>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">1--5</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="foot"
                        n="footcite:shaw2010atomic"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_shaw2010atomic">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Atomic-level characterization of the structural dynamics of proteins.</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">D. E.</forename>
                        <forename>D. E.</forename>
                        <persName>Shaw</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">P.</forename>
                        <forename>P.</forename>
                        <persName>Maragakis</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">K.</forename>
                        <forename>K.</forename>
                        <persName>Lindorff-Larsen</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">S.</forename>
                        <forename>S.</forename>
                        <persName>Piana</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">R. O.</forename>
                        <forename>R. O.</forename>
                        <persName>Dror</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">M. P.</forename>
                        <forename>M. P.</forename>
                        <persName>Eastwood</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">J. A.</forename>
                        <forename>J. A.</forename>
                        <persName>Bank</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">J. M.</forename>
                        <forename>J. M.</forename>
                        <persName>Jumper</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">J. K.</forename>
                        <forename>J. K.</forename>
                        <persName>Salmon</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">Y.</forename>
                        <forename>Y.</forename>
                        <persName>Shan</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">W.</forename>
                        <forename>W.</forename>
                        <persName>Wriggers</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">Science</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>2010</date>
                     <biblScope unit="volume">330</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="number">6002</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">341--346</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="book"
                        rend="foot"
                        n="footcite:wales2003energy"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_wales2003energy">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Energy Landscapes</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">D. J.</forename>
                        <forename>D. J.</forename>
                        <persName>Wales</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>2003</date>
                     <publisher>Cambridge University Press</publisher>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
            <biblStruct type="article"
                        rend="foot"
                        n="footcite:wang2014building"
                        xml:id="ABS-RA-2021_bibitem_wang2014building">
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a">Building force fields: an automatic, systematic, and reproducible approach</title>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">L.-P.</forename>
                        <forename>Lee-Ping</forename>
                        <persName>Wang</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">T. J.</forename>
                        <forename>Todd J</forename>
                        <persName>Martinez</persName>
                     </persName>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="initials">V. S.</forename>
                        <forename>Vijay S</forename>
                        <persName>Pande</persName>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j">The journal of physical chemistry letters</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date>2014</date>
                     <biblScope unit="volume">5</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="number">11</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="pages">1885--1891</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
         </div>
      </back>
   </text>
</TEI>
